README.md, before:

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/bergmanlab/mcclintock/blob/master/img/mcclintock.jpg?raw=true" alt="McClintock in action"/>
</p>

Introduction
------
Many methods have been developed to detect transposable element (TE) insertions from whole genome shotgun next-generation sequencing (NGS) data, each of which has different dependencies, run interfaces, and output formats. Here, we have developed a meta-pipeline to install and run six methods for detecting TE insertions in NGS data, which generates output in the UCSC Browser extensible data (BED) format. A detailed description of the McClintock pipeline and evaluation of McClintock component methods on the yeast genome can be found in [Nelson, Linheiro and Bergman (2017) *G3* 7:2763-2778](http://www.g3journal.org/content/7/8/2763).

The complete pipeline requires a fasta reference genome, a fasta consensus set of TE sequences present in the organism and fastq paired end sequencing reads. Optionally if detailed annotation of the reference TE sequences has been performed, a GFF file with the locations of known TEs present in the reference genome and a tab delimited hierarchy file linking these individual insertions to the consensus they belong to (an example of this file is included in the test directory as sac_cer_te_families.tsv) can be supplied. If only single ended sequencing data are available then this can be supplied as option -1 however only ngs_te_mapper and RelocaTE will run as these are the only methods that handle it.

Software Methods
------
 * [ngs_te_mapper](https://github.com/bergmanlab/ngs_te_mapper) - [Linheiro and Bergman (2012)](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371/journal.pone.0030008)
 * [RelocaTE](https://github.com/srobb1/RelocaTE) - [Robb *et al.* (2013)](http://www.g3journal.org/content/3/6/949.long)
 * [TEMP](https://github.com/JialiUMassWengLab/TEMP) - [Zhuang *et al.* (2014)](http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/42/11/6826.full)
 * [RetroSeq](https://github.com/tk2/RetroSeq) - [Keane *et al.* (2012)](http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/29/3/389.long)
 * [PoPoolationTE](https://code.google.com/p/popoolationte/) - [Kofler *et al.* (2012)](http://www.plosgenetics.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pgen.1002487;jsessionid=2CFC9BF7DEF785D90070915204B5F846)
 * [TE-locate](http://zendto.gmi.oeaw.ac.at/pickup.php?claimID=Y3tZVfN5xipYyBDN&claimPasscode=NArXMbTjmkorWjSM&emailAddr=te_locate%40gmx.at) - [Platzer *et al.* (2012)](http://www.mdpi.com/2079-7737/1/2/395)

Software Dependencies
------
All of the software systems must be run on a unix based system with the software dependencies listed per method below. FastQC is an optional step, if the software is not present then mcclintock will skip the step and you will not receive a quality report for your fastq input in the results directory. The versions used to run this pipeline are indicated in parentheses and no guarantee is made that it will function using alternate versions. In the case of bwa it is almost certain that some methods will fail if version v.0.7.4-r385 is not installed.

 * Optional software for the pipeline
    * [FastQC](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) (Command line installation v0.11.2)
    * [RepeatMasker](http://www.repeatmasker.org/RMDownload.html) (v.4.0.2) (Necessary if no GFF is supplied)

 * ngs_te_mapper
    * [R](http://cran.r-project.org/) (v.3.0.2)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.0.7.4-r385)

 * RelocaTE
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [BioPerl](http://www.bioperl.org/wiki/Getting_BioPerl) (v.1.006901)
    * [SAMtools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [Blat](http://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~kent/src/) (v.35x1)
    * [Bowtie](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/index.shtml) (v.1.0.0)
  
* TEMP
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [BioPerl](http://www.bioperl.org/wiki/Getting_BioPerl) (v.1.006901)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.0.7.4-r385)
    * [SAMtools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [BEDTools](https://code.google.com/p/bedtools/downloads/list) (v.2.17.0)
    * [twoBitToFa](http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/linux.x86_64/twoBitToFa) (ucsc-tools v.294)

* RetroSeq
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [BEDTools](https://code.google.com/p/bedtools/downloads/list) (v.2.17.0)
    * [SAMtools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [BCFTools](https://github.com/samtools/bcftools) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [Exonerate](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/~guy/exonerate/) (v.2.2.0)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.0.7.4-r385)

* PoPoolationTE
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [RepeatMasker](http://www.repeatmasker.org/RMDownload.html) (v.4.0.2)
    * [SAMtools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.0.7.4-r385)

* TE-locate
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [Java](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html) (v.1.6.0_24)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.00.7.4-r385)

How to run 
------

### Installation
To install the software, from the main pipeline directory, first clone the repository:

```
git clone git@github.com:bergmanlab/mcclintock.git
```

Then cd into the project directory and run the script install.sh with no arguments:

```
cd mcclintock
sh install.sh
```

This will download and unpack all of the TE detection pipelines and check that the required dependencies are available in your path. Missing dependencies will be reported and you must install or make sure these are available to run the full pipeline.

### Running on a test dataset
A script is included to run the full pipeline on a test Illumina resequencing dataset from the yeast genome. To run this test script change directory into the directory named test and run the script runttest.sh. 

```
cd test
sh runtest.sh
```

This script will download the UCSC sacCer2 yeast reference genome, an annotation of TEs in the yeast reference genome from [Carr, Bensasson and Bergman (2012)](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0050978), and a pair of fastq files from SRA, then run the full pipeline.

### Running the pipeline
The pipeline is invoked by running the mcclintock.sh script in the main project directory. This script takes the following 6 input files, specified as options:
* `-m` : A string containing the list of software you want the pipeline to use for analysis e.g. \"-m relocate TEMP ngs_te_mapper\" will launch only those three methods [Optional: default is to run all methods]
* `-r` : A reference genome sequence in fasta format. [Required]
* `-c` : The consensus sequences of the TEs for the species in fasta format. [Required]
* `-g` : The locations of known TEs in the reference genome in GFF 3 format. This must include a unique ID attribute for every entry. [Optional]
* `-t` : A tab delimited file with one entry per ID in the GFF file and two columns: the first containing the ID and the second containing the TE family it belongs to. The family should correspond to the names of the sequences in the consensus fasta file. [Optional - required if GFF (option -g) is supplied]
* `-T` : If this option is specified then fastq comments (e.g. barcode) will be incorporated to SAM output. Warning: do not use this option if the input fastq files do not have comments. [Optional: default will not include this]
* `-d` : If this option is specified then McClintock will perform depth of coverage analysis for every TE. Note: perform coverage analysis for TEs will result in longer running time. [Optional: default will not include this]
* `-1` : The absolute path of the first fastq file from a paired end read, this should be named ending _1.fastq. [Required]
* `-2` : The absolute path of the second fastq file from a paired end read, this should be named ending _2.fastq. [Optional]
* `-o` : An output directory for the run. If not supplied then the reference genome name will be used. [Optional]
* `-b` : Retain the sorted and indexed BAM file of the paired end data aligned to the reference genome.
* `-i` : If this option is specified then all sample specific intermediate files will be removed, leaving only the overall results. The default is to leave sample specific intermediate files (may require large amounts of disk space)
* `-C` : This option will include the consensus TE sequences as extra chromosomes in the reference file (useful if the organism is known to have TEs that are not present in the reference strain). [Optional: default will not include this]
* `-R` : This option will include the reference TE sequences as extra chromosomes in the reference file [Optional: default will not include this]
* `-p` : The number of processors to use for parallel stages of the pipeline. [Optional: default = 1]
* `-M` : The amount of memory available for the pipeline in GB. [Optional: default = 4]
* `-h` : Prints this help guide.

Example pipeline run:
```
sh mcclintock.sh -m "RelocaTE TEMP ngs_te_mapper" -r reference.fasta -c te_consensus.fasta -g te_locations.gff -t te_families.tsv -1 sample_1.fastq -2 sample_2.fastq -p 2 -i -b
```

Data created during processing will be stored in a directory in the output directory (if one is specified) within main directory named after the reference genome used with individual sub-directories for samples. 

### Output
Output files for a full McClintock run or individual components are located in a directory named with the following path structure `/reference_genome/sample_name/results/`. All directories referred to below are contained within this parent directory.

If FastQC was present on the system, then output of FastQC will be stored in the directory `/summary/fastqc_analysis`. The `/summary` directory also includes a file with the output of bamstats, a file with the estimated median insert size of the library for paired-end samples, a file with the summary report for the McClintock pipeline and a file with the family and method based TE detection results.

The summary report for the McClintock pipeline `summary_report.txt` will include version and arguments used for the pipeline, number of reads, median insert size, average genome coverage and total number of TEs detected for each method (including all, reference and non-reference).

If TE coverage analysis module was enabled using `-d` option, then output of the module will be stored in `/summary/te_coverage/te_depth.csv`, containing normalized average depth for every TE in the TE library.

The file structure for `summary` will look like this:

File | Description
-- | --
/summary/te_coverage | Normalized average coverage for every TE family
/summary/median_insertsize | Median insert size of the library
/summary/bwamem_bamstats.txt | bamstats report
/summary/fastqc_analysis | FastQC analysis output directory
/summary/summary_report.txt | McClintock summary report
/summary/te_summary_table.csv | Family and method based TE detection summary
/summary/te_coverage/te_depth.csv | Normalized average depth for every TE in the TE library (only generated when `-d` is specified)

Original result files for non-reference and (when available) reference predictions produced by each method are stored in the directory `/originalmethodresults`, containing one sub-directory for each method. Original non-reference and (when available) reference files are then merged and filtered to create 0-based .bed6 format files. For TEMP, Retroseq, and PoPoolationTE, original files are converted into \*raw.bed files that contain all unfiltered predictions for non-reference predictions plus reference TE predictions if provided by the method. Score (Retroseq, ≥6), read support (TEMP and PopoolationTE, reads found for both ends)  and sample frequency (TEMP, >10%) are used to filter raw prediction to create \*redundant.bed files. For RelocaTE, original files from individual families are merged and used to create \*redundant.bed files. For TE-locate, original files are used to create \*redundant.bed directly. \*redundant.bed are filtered to remove predictions that have the identical coordinates for different TE families, with the prediction having the greatest read support (RelocaTE, TEMP, PopoolationTE, TE-locate) or call status (Retroseq) being retained. Non-identical overlapping predictions are retained. The final output file of the run scripts for individual methods after merging reference and non-reference predictions and filtering is \*nonredundant.bed. For ngs_te_mapper, no filtering or merging is needed, and thus \*nonredundant.bed files are created directly.

Individual methods output predictions in different annotation frameworks, which are standardized in \*nonredundant.bed as follows: 
 * For ngs_te_mapper, non-reference TEs are annotated as 0-based TSDs. Reference TEs are annotated as 0-based intervals which are inferred from the data, not from the reference TE annotation. Strand information is present for both non-reference and reference TEs. No filtering or coordinate conversions are needed to create 0-based predictions in \*nonredundant.bed files. 
 * For RelocaTE, non-reference TEs are annotated as 1-based TSDs and reference TEs are annotated on the same 1-based intervals provided in the reference annotation. Strand information is present for both non-reference and reference TEs. Start coordinates are transformed by -1 to create 0-based predictions in \*nonredundant.bed files. 
 * For TEMP, non-reference TEs with or without split-read support are annotated as 1-based intervals in the Start and End columns on the basis of closest supporting read-pairs. Non-reference TEs with split-read support at both ends are annotated as 1-based TSDs in the Junction1 and Junction2 columns. Strand information is present for non-reference TEs. Non-reference predictions with read support on both ends ("1p1") and a sample frequency of >10% are retained in the \*nonredundant.bed files. For non-reference predictions with split-read support on both ends, 0-based coordinates of TSDs were used in the \*nonredundant.bed files. For all other non-reference predictions, 0-based coordinates of read-pair intervals were used in the *nonredundant.bed files. TEMP does not directly detect whether reference TEs are present in the sample, however the results of the TEMP absence module can be used to infer complementary information about the presence of reference annotated TEs. TEMP reference predictions are labelled with "nonab", representing a TE inferred from non-absence to distinguish them from reference TE predictions based on direct evidence.
 * For Retroseq, non-reference TEs are annotated as 1-based intervals in the POS column of the VCF file and two consecutive coordinates in the INFO field. No predictions are made for reference TEs. Strand information is not provided. Insertion with a call status of ≥6 are retained, and the two consecutive coordinates in the INFO field are used to represent a single base insertion on 0-based coordinates in the *redundant.bed and \*nonredundant.bed files.
 * For PoPoolationTE, non-reference and reference TEs are annotated as 1-based intervals on either end of the predicted insertion, and also as a midpoint between the inner coordinates of the two terminal spans (which can lead to half-base midpoint coordinates). Intervals of reference TEs are inferred from the data using locations of reference TE annotations.  Only predictions with read support on both ends ("FR") were retained, and the entire interval between the inner coordinates of the of the two terminal spans (not the midpoint) was converted to 0-based coordinates and used in the \*redundant.bed and \*nonredundant.bed files.
 * For TE-locate, non-reference ("new") and reference ("old") TEs are annotated as 1-based positions plus the length of the inserted TE. Strand information is present, where available, for non-reference TEs. For non-reference TEs the single 1-based coordinate is decreased by one for the start of the insertion and used directly for the end on 0-based coordinates in the \*redundant.bed and \*nonredundant.bed files. For reference TEs the single 1-based coordinate is decreased by one for the start of the insertion and increased by the length of the inserted TE for the end on 0-based coordinates in the \*redundant.bed and \*nonredundant.bed files. 
 
The 4th column of \*nonredundant.bed files contains a string with the name of the TE family, whether it is a non-reference or reference insertion, the sample name, the method name, the evidence type (sr = split-read, rp = read pair), and a numerical index of the prediction in the \*raw.bed or \*redundant.bed file. As noted above, reference insertions for TEMP are labeled as "nonab" to distinguish them from reference TE predictions based on direct evidence. The final \*nonredundant.bed output file also includes a header line for use with the UCSC genome browser. 

License
------
Copyright 2014-2017 Michael G. Nelson and Casey M. Bergman

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Commit message:

Add note to README about required dependencies during installation.

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/bergmanlab/mcclintock/blob/master/img/mcclintock.jpg?raw=true" alt="McClintock in action"/>
</p>

Introduction
------
Many methods have been developed to detect transposable element (TE) insertions from whole genome shotgun next-generation sequencing (NGS) data, each of which has different dependencies, run interfaces, and output formats. Here, we have developed a meta-pipeline to install and run six methods for detecting TE insertions in NGS data, which generates output in the UCSC Browser extensible data (BED) format. A detailed description of the McClintock pipeline and evaluation of McClintock component methods on the yeast genome can be found in [Nelson, Linheiro and Bergman (2017) *G3* 7:2763-2778](http://www.g3journal.org/content/7/8/2763).

The complete pipeline requires a fasta reference genome, a fasta consensus set of TE sequences present in the organism and fastq paired end sequencing reads. Optionally if detailed annotation of the reference TE sequences has been performed, a GFF file with the locations of known TEs present in the reference genome and a tab delimited hierarchy file linking these individual insertions to the consensus they belong to (an example of this file is included in the test directory as sac_cer_te_families.tsv) can be supplied. If only single ended sequencing data are available then this can be supplied as option -1 however only ngs_te_mapper and RelocaTE will run as these are the only methods that handle it.

Software Methods
------
 * [ngs_te_mapper](https://github.com/bergmanlab/ngs_te_mapper) - [Linheiro and Bergman (2012)](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371/journal.pone.0030008)
 * [RelocaTE](https://github.com/srobb1/RelocaTE) - [Robb *et al.* (2013)](http://www.g3journal.org/content/3/6/949.long)
 * [TEMP](https://github.com/JialiUMassWengLab/TEMP) - [Zhuang *et al.* (2014)](http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/42/11/6826.full)
 * [RetroSeq](https://github.com/tk2/RetroSeq) - [Keane *et al.* (2012)](http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/29/3/389.long)
 * [PoPoolationTE](https://code.google.com/p/popoolationte/) - [Kofler *et al.* (2012)](http://www.plosgenetics.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pgen.1002487;jsessionid=2CFC9BF7DEF785D90070915204B5F846)
 * [TE-locate](http://zendto.gmi.oeaw.ac.at/pickup.php?claimID=Y3tZVfN5xipYyBDN&claimPasscode=NArXMbTjmkorWjSM&emailAddr=te_locate%40gmx.at) - [Platzer *et al.* (2012)](http://www.mdpi.com/2079-7737/1/2/395)

Software Dependencies
------
All of the software systems must be run on a unix based system with the software dependencies listed per method below. FastQC is an optional step, if the software is not present then mcclintock will skip the step and you will not receive a quality report for your fastq input in the results directory. The versions used to run this pipeline are indicated in parentheses and no guarantee is made that it will function using alternate versions. In the case of bwa it is almost certain that some methods will fail if version v.0.7.4-r385 is not installed.

 * Optional software for the pipeline
    * [FastQC](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) (Command line installation v0.11.2)
    * [RepeatMasker](http://www.repeatmasker.org/RMDownload.html) (v.4.0.2) (Necessary if no GFF is supplied)

 * ngs_te_mapper
    * [R](http://cran.r-project.org/) (v.3.0.2)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.0.7.4-r385)

 * RelocaTE
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [BioPerl](http://www.bioperl.org/wiki/Getting_BioPerl) (v.1.006901)
    * [SAMtools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [Blat](http://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~kent/src/) (v.35x1)
    * [Bowtie](http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/index.shtml) (v.1.0.0)
  
* TEMP
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [BioPerl](http://www.bioperl.org/wiki/Getting_BioPerl) (v.1.006901)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.0.7.4-r385)
    * [SAMtools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [BEDTools](https://code.google.com/p/bedtools/downloads/list) (v.2.17.0)
    * [twoBitToFa](http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/linux.x86_64/twoBitToFa) (ucsc-tools v.294)

* RetroSeq
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [BEDTools](https://code.google.com/p/bedtools/downloads/list) (v.2.17.0)
    * [SAMtools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [BCFTools](https://github.com/samtools/bcftools) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [Exonerate](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/~guy/exonerate/) (v.2.2.0)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.0.7.4-r385)

* PoPoolationTE
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [RepeatMasker](http://www.repeatmasker.org/RMDownload.html) (v.4.0.2)
    * [SAMtools](http://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/) (v.0.1.19-44428cd)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.0.7.4-r385)

* TE-locate
    * [Perl](http://www.perl.org/get.html) (v.5.14.2)
    * [Java](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html) (v.1.6.0_24)
    * [BWA](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/commit/c14aaad1ce72f5784bfe04df757a6b12fe07b7ea) (v.00.7.4-r385)

How to run 
------

### Installation
To install the software, from the main pipeline directory, first clone the repository:

```
git clone git@github.com:bergmanlab/mcclintock.git
```

Then cd into the project directory and run the script install.sh with no arguments:

```
cd mcclintock
sh install.sh
```

This will download and unpack all of the TE detection pipelines and check that the required dependencies are available in your path. Missing dependencies will be reported and you must install or make sure these are available to run the full pipeline.

Note: required dependencies should be available in your enrivonment path before the installation, lack of dependencies might result in incorrect configurations for certain component methods.

### Running on a test dataset
A script is included to run the full pipeline on a test Illumina resequencing dataset from the yeast genome. To run this test script change directory into the directory named test and run the script runttest.sh. 

```
cd test
sh runtest.sh
```

This script will download the UCSC sacCer2 yeast reference genome, an annotation of TEs in the yeast reference genome from [Carr, Bensasson and Bergman (2012)](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0050978), and a pair of fastq files from SRA, then run the full pipeline.

### Running the pipeline
The pipeline is invoked by running the mcclintock.sh script in the main project directory. This script takes the following 6 input files, specified as options:
* `-m` : A string containing the list of software you want the pipeline to use for analysis e.g. \"-m relocate TEMP ngs_te_mapper\" will launch only those three methods [Optional: default is to run all methods]
* `-r` : A reference genome sequence in fasta format. [Required]
* `-c` : The consensus sequences of the TEs for the species in fasta format. [Required]
* `-g` : The locations of known TEs in the reference genome in GFF 3 format. This must include a unique ID attribute for every entry. [Optional]
* `-t` : A tab delimited file with one entry per ID in the GFF file and two columns: the first containing the ID and the second containing the TE family it belongs to. The family should correspond to the names of the sequences in the consensus fasta file. [Optional - required if GFF (option -g) is supplied]
* `-T` : If this option is specified then fastq comments (e.g. barcode) will be incorporated to SAM output. Warning: do not use this option if the input fastq files do not have comments. [Optional: default will not include this]
* `-d` : If this option is specified then McClintock will perform depth of coverage analysis for every TE. Note: perform coverage analysis for TEs will result in longer running time. [Optional: default will not include this]
* `-1` : The absolute path of the first fastq file from a paired end read, this should be named ending _1.fastq. [Required]
* `-2` : The absolute path of the second fastq file from a paired end read, this should be named ending _2.fastq. [Optional]
* `-o` : An output directory for the run. If not supplied then the reference genome name will be used. [Optional]
* `-b` : Retain the sorted and indexed BAM file of the paired end data aligned to the reference genome.
* `-i` : If this option is specified then all sample specific intermediate files will be removed, leaving only the overall results. The default is to leave sample specific intermediate files (may require large amounts of disk space)
* `-C` : This option will include the consensus TE sequences as extra chromosomes in the reference file (useful if the organism is known to have TEs that are not present in the reference strain). [Optional: default will not include this]
* `-R` : This option will include the reference TE sequences as extra chromosomes in the reference file [Optional: default will not include this]
* `-p` : The number of processors to use for parallel stages of the pipeline. [Optional: default = 1]
* `-M` : The amount of memory available for the pipeline in GB. [Optional: default = 4]
* `-h` : Prints this help guide.

Example pipeline run:
```
sh mcclintock.sh -m "RelocaTE TEMP ngs_te_mapper" -r reference.fasta -c te_consensus.fasta -g te_locations.gff -t te_families.tsv -1 sample_1.fastq -2 sample_2.fastq -p 2 -i -b
```

Data created during processing will be stored in a directory in the output directory (if one is specified) within main directory named after the reference genome used with individual sub-directories for samples. 

### Output
Output files for a full McClintock run or individual components are located in a directory named with the following path structure `/reference_genome/sample_name/results/`. All directories referred to below are contained within this parent directory.

If FastQC was present on the system, then output of FastQC will be stored in the directory `/summary/fastqc_analysis`. The `/summary` directory also includes a file with the output of bamstats, a file with the estimated median insert size of the library for paired-end samples, a file with the summary report for the McClintock pipeline and a file with the family and method based TE detection results.

The summary report for the McClintock pipeline `summary_report.txt` will include version and arguments used for the pipeline, number of reads, median insert size, average genome coverage and total number of TEs detected for each method (including all, reference and non-reference).

If TE coverage analysis module was enabled using `-d` option, then output of the module will be stored in `/summary/te_coverage/te_depth.csv`, containing normalized average depth for every TE in the TE library.

The file structure for `summary` will look like this:

File | Description
-- | --
/summary/te_coverage | Normalized average coverage for every TE family
/summary/median_insertsize | Median insert size of the library
/summary/bwamem_bamstats.txt | bamstats report
/summary/fastqc_analysis | FastQC analysis output directory
/summary/summary_report.txt | McClintock summary report
/summary/te_summary_table.csv | Family and method based TE detection summary
/summary/te_coverage/te_depth.csv | Normalized average depth for every TE in the TE library (only generated when `-d` is specified)

Original result files for non-reference and (when available) reference predictions produced by each method are stored in the directory `/originalmethodresults`, containing one sub-directory for each method. Original non-reference and (when available) reference files are then merged and filtered to create 0-based .bed6 format files. For TEMP, Retroseq, and PoPoolationTE, original files are converted into \*raw.bed files that contain all unfiltered predictions for non-reference predictions plus reference TE predictions if provided by the method. Score (Retroseq, ≥6), read support (TEMP and PopoolationTE, reads found for both ends)  and sample frequency (TEMP, >10%) are used to filter raw prediction to create \*redundant.bed files. For RelocaTE, original files from individual families are merged and used to create \*redundant.bed files. For TE-locate, original files are used to create \*redundant.bed directly. \*redundant.bed are filtered to remove predictions that have the identical coordinates for different TE families, with the prediction having the greatest read support (RelocaTE, TEMP, PopoolationTE, TE-locate) or call status (Retroseq) being retained. Non-identical overlapping predictions are retained. The final output file of the run scripts for individual methods after merging reference and non-reference predictions and filtering is \*nonredundant.bed. For ngs_te_mapper, no filtering or merging is needed, and thus \*nonredundant.bed files are created directly.

Individual methods output predictions in different annotation frameworks, which are standardized in \*nonredundant.bed as follows: 
 * For ngs_te_mapper, non-reference TEs are annotated as 0-based TSDs. Reference TEs are annotated as 0-based intervals which are inferred from the data, not from the reference TE annotation. Strand information is present for both non-reference and reference TEs. No filtering or coordinate conversions are needed to create 0-based predictions in \*nonredundant.bed files. 
 * For RelocaTE, non-reference TEs are annotated as 1-based TSDs and reference TEs are annotated on the same 1-based intervals provided in the reference annotation. Strand information is present for both non-reference and reference TEs. Start coordinates are transformed by -1 to create 0-based predictions in \*nonredundant.bed files. 
 * For TEMP, non-reference TEs with or without split-read support are annotated as 1-based intervals in the Start and End columns on the basis of closest supporting read-pairs. Non-reference TEs with split-read support at both ends are annotated as 1-based TSDs in the Junction1 and Junction2 columns. Strand information is present for non-reference TEs. Non-reference predictions with read support on both ends ("1p1") and a sample frequency of >10% are retained in the \*nonredundant.bed files. For non-reference predictions with split-read support on both ends, 0-based coordinates of TSDs were used in the \*nonredundant.bed files. For all other non-reference predictions, 0-based coordinates of read-pair intervals were used in the *nonredundant.bed files. TEMP does not directly detect whether reference TEs are present in the sample, however the results of the TEMP absence module can be used to infer complementary information about the presence of reference annotated TEs. TEMP reference predictions are labelled with "nonab", representing a TE inferred from non-absence to distinguish them from reference TE predictions based on direct evidence.
 * For Retroseq, non-reference TEs are annotated as 1-based intervals in the POS column of the VCF file and two consecutive coordinates in the INFO field. No predictions are made for reference TEs. Strand information is not provided. Insertion with a call status of ≥6 are retained, and the two consecutive coordinates in the INFO field are used to represent a single base insertion on 0-based coordinates in the *redundant.bed and \*nonredundant.bed files.
 * For PoPoolationTE, non-reference and reference TEs are annotated as 1-based intervals on either end of the predicted insertion, and also as a midpoint between the inner coordinates of the two terminal spans (which can lead to half-base midpoint coordinates). Intervals of reference TEs are inferred from the data using locations of reference TE annotations.  Only predictions with read support on both ends ("FR") were retained, and the entire interval between the inner coordinates of the of the two terminal spans (not the midpoint) was converted to 0-based coordinates and used in the \*redundant.bed and \*nonredundant.bed files.
 * For TE-locate, non-reference ("new") and reference ("old") TEs are annotated as 1-based positions plus the length of the inserted TE. Strand information is present, where available, for non-reference TEs. For non-reference TEs the single 1-based coordinate is decreased by one for the start of the insertion and used directly for the end on 0-based coordinates in the \*redundant.bed and \*nonredundant.bed files. For reference TEs the single 1-based coordinate is decreased by one for the start of the insertion and increased by the length of the inserted TE for the end on 0-based coordinates in the \*redundant.bed and \*nonredundant.bed files. 
 
The 4th column of \*nonredundant.bed files contains a string with the name of the TE family, whether it is a non-reference or reference insertion, the sample name, the method name, the evidence type (sr = split-read, rp = read pair), and a numerical index of the prediction in the \*raw.bed or \*redundant.bed file. As noted above, reference insertions for TEMP are labeled as "nonab" to distinguish them from reference TE predictions based on direct evidence. The final \*nonredundant.bed output file also includes a header line for use with the UCSC genome browser. 

License
------
Copyright 2014-2017 Michael G. Nelson and Casey M. Bergman

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
